democracy in the West we make a colossal
mistake taking it for granted
with the democracy not as the most
fragile of flowers that it really is but
we see it as part of our society's
furniture we tend to think of it as an
in transient given we mistakenly believe
that capitalism baguettes inevitably
democracy it doesn't
Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew and his great
imitators in Beijing have demonstrated
beyond reasonable doubt that it is
perfectly possible to have a flourishing
capitalism spectacular growth while
politics remains democracy free indeed
democracy is receding in our neck of the
woods here in Europe earlier this year
while I was representing Greece the
newly elected Greek government in the
Euro group as its finance minister I was
told in no uncertain terms that our
nation's democratic process our
elections could not be allowed to
interfere with economic policies that
were being implemented in Greece at that
moment I felt that there could be no
greater vindication of laQuan you or the
Chinese Communist Party indeed of some
recalcitrant friends of mine who kept
telling me that democracy would be
banned if it ever threatened to change
anything tonight here I want to present
to you an economic case for an authentic
democracy I want to ask you to join me
in believing again that Lee Kuan Yew the
Chinese Communist Party and it is the
Eurogroup are wrong in believing that we
can dispense with democracy that we need
an authentic boisterous democracy and
without democracy our societies will be
nastier
our future bleak and our great new
technologies wasted
speaking of waste allow me to point out
an interesting paradox that is
threatening our economies as we speak I
call it the twin peaks' paradox one peak
you understand you know it you recognize
it is the mountain of debts that is has
been casting a long shadow over the
United States Europe the whole world we
all recognize the mountain of debt but
few people discern its twin a mountain
of idle cash belonging to reach savers
and corporations too terrified to invest
it into the productive activities that
can generate the income from which we
can extinguish the mountain of debts and
which can produce all those things that
humanity desperately needs like green
energy now let me give you two numbers
over the last three months in the United
States in Britain and in the eurozone we
have invested collectively three point
four trillion dollars on all the wealth
producing goods things like industrial
plants machinery office blocks schools
roads railways machinery and so on and
so forth three point four trillion
sounds like a lot of money until you
compare it to the 5.1 trillion that has
been slashing around in the same
countries in our financial institutions
doing absolutely nothing during the same
period except inflating stock exchanges
and bidding up house prices so a
mountain of debt and the mountain of
idle cash form twin peaks failing to
cancel each other out through the normal
operation of the markets the result is
stagnant wages more than a quarter of 25
to 54 year olds in America in Japan and
in Europe out of work and consequently
low aggregate demand which in a
never-ending cycle reinforces the
pessimism of the investors who fearing
low demand reproduce it by not investing
exactly like Eddie Bush's father
who terrified by the prophecy of the
Oracle that his son would grow up kill
him and wittingly engineered the
conditions that ensured that it was his
son would kill him this is my quarrel
with capitalism it grows wastefulness
all this idle cash should be energized
to improve lives to develop human
talents and indeed to finance all these
technologies green technologies which
are absolutely essential for saving
planet Earth
am i right in believing that democracy
might be the answer I believe so but
before we move on what do we mean by
democracy it is total defined democracy
as the Constitution in which the free
and the poor being in the majority
control government now of course
Athenian democracy excluded too many
women migrants and of course the slaves
but it would be a mistake to dismiss the
significance of ancient Athenian
democracy on the basis of whom it
excluded what was more pertinent and
continues to be so about ancient
Athenian democracy it was the inclusion
of the working poor who not only
acquired the right to free speech but
more importantly crucially they acquire
the right to political judgments that
were afforded equal weight in the
decision-making concerning matters of
State now of course Athenian democracy
didn't last long like a candle that
burns brightly it burned out quickly and
indeed our liberal democracies today do
not have their roots in ancient Athens
they have their roots in the Magna Carta
in the 1688 glorious revolution indeed
in the American Constitution whereas
Athenian democracy was focusing on the
masterless citizen and empowering the
working poor our liberal democracies are
founded on a Magna Carta tradition which
was after all a charter for masters and
indeed liberal democracy only surfaced
when it was possible to separate fully
the political sphere from the economic
sphere
so as to confine the democratic process
fully in the political sphere leaving
the economic sphere the corporate world
if you want as a democracy free zone now
in our democracies today this separation
of the economic from the political
sphere the moment is started happening
it gave rise to an inexorable epic
struggle between the two with the
economic sphere colonizing the political
sphere eating into its power have you
wondered why politicians are not what
they used to be it's not because their
DNA has degenerated it is rather because
one can be in government today and not
in power because power has migrated from
the political to the economic sphere
which is separate indeed I spoke about
my quarrel with capitalism if you think
about it it is a little bit like a
population of predators that are so
successful in decimating the prey that
they must feed on that in the end they
starve
similarly the economic sphere has been
colonizing and cannibalizing the
political sphere to such an extent that
it is undermining itself causing
economic crisis corporate power is
increasing political goods are devaluing
inequality is rising aggregate demand is
falling and CEOs of corporations are too
scared to invest the cash of their
corporations so the more capitalism
succeeds in taking the demons out of
democracy the taller between peaks at
the greater the waste of human resources
and humanity's wealth clearly if this is
right we must reunite the political and
economic sphere and better do it with
Adiemus being in control like in ancient
Athens except we are the slaves or the
exclusion of women and migrants now this
is not an original idea the marxist left
had that idea 100 years ago and it
didn't go very well did the lesson that
we learned from the soviet the battle
is that only by a miracle with the
working poor be rien powered as they
were in ancient Athens without creating
new forms of brutality and waste but
there is a solution
eliminate the working poor capitalism is
doing it by replacing low-wage workers
with automata androids robots the
problem is that as long as the economic
and the political spheres are separate
automation makes the Twin Peaks taller
the waist loftier and the social
conflicts deeper including soon I
believe in places like China so we need
to reconfigure we need to reunite
economic and the political spheres but
we better do it by democratizing the
reunified sphere less to end up with a
surveillance mad hypocracy that makes
the matrix the movie look like a
documentary so the question is not
whether capitalism will survive the
technological innovations it is spawning
the more interesting question is whether
capitalism will be succeeded by
something resembling a matrix dystopia
or something much closer to a star
trek-like society where machines serve
the humans and the humans expend their
energies exploring the universe and
indulging in long debates about the
meaning of life in some ancient Athenian
like high-tech Agora I think we can
afford to be optimistic but what would
it take what would it look like to have
this star trek-like utopia instead of
the matrix like dystopia
in practical terms allow me to share
just briefly a couple of examples at the
level of the enterprise imagine a
capital market where you earn capital as
you work and where your capital follows
you from one job to another
from one company to another and the
company whichever one you happen to work
at at that time is solely owned by those
who happen to work in it at that moment
then all income stems from capital from
profits and the very concept of wage
labor becomes obsolete no more
separation between those who own but do
not work in the company and those who
work but do not own the company no more
a tug of war between capital and labor
no great gap between investment and
saving indeed no towering twin peaks at
the level of the global political
economy imagine for a moment that our
national currencies have a free floating
exchange rate with a universal global
digital currency one that is issued by
the International Monetary Fund that g20
on behalf of all humanity and imagine
further that all international trade is
denominated in this currency let's call
it the cosmos in units of cosmos with
every government agreeing to be paying
into a common fund a sum of Cosmos units
proportional to the country's trade
deficit or indeed to a country's trade
surplus and imagine that that fund is
utilized to invest in green technologies
especially in parts of the world where
investment funding is scarce this is not
a new idea
it's what effectively john maynard
keynes proposed in 1944 at the Bretton
Woods conference the problem is that
back then they didn't have the
technology to implement it now we do
especially in the context of a reunified
political economic sphere the world that
I am describing to you is simultaneously
libertarian in that it prioritizes
empowered individuals Marxist since it
will have confined to the dustbin of
history
the division between capital and labor
and Keynesian global Keynesian but above
all else it is a world in which we will
be able to imagine an authentic
democracy will such a world dawn or
shall we descend into a matrix like
dystopia the answer lies in a political
choice that we shall be making
collectively it is our choice and we
better make it democratically thank
be honest if you describe yourself in
your bias as a libertarian Marxist
what's the relevance of Marxist analysis
today well if there was any relevance in
what I just said then Marx is relevant
because the whole point of reunifying
the political and economic is if we
don't do it then technological
innovation is going to create such a
massive fall in aggregate demand what
Larry Summers refers to as secular
stagnation with this crisis migrating
from one part of the world as it is now
that it will destabilize not only our
democracies but even the emerging world
that is not that keen on liberal
democracy so if this analysis holds
water then Marx is absolutely relevant
but so is Hayek that's why I'm a
libertarian Marxist so is gains so
that's why I'm totally confused indeed
and possibly we are too now if you're
not confused you're not thinking again
ok that's very very great philosopher
kind of thing to say well that's why
Einstein actually yes during your talk
you mentioned Singapore in China and
yesterday night at the speaker dinner
you expressed a pretty strong opinion
about how the West looks at China I
would like to share that well there is a
great degree of hypocrisy in our liberal
democracies we have a semblance of
democracy it's because we have confined
as I was saying in my talk democracy to
the political sphere why leaving the one
sphere where all the action is the
economic sphere a completely democracy
free zone in a sense if I am allowed to
be provocative China a day is closer to
Britain in the 19th century because
remember we tend to associate liberalism
with democracy that's a mistake
historically liberalism liberals like
John Stuart Mill John here bill I was
particularly skeptical about the
democratic process so what you are
seeing now in China is a very similar
process to the one that we had in in
Britain during the Industrial Revolution
especially the transition from the first
to the second and to be
castigating China for doing that which
the West did in the 19th century smacks
of hypocrisy I am sure that many people
here are wondering about your experience
as a finance minister of Greece earlier
this year I knew this was coming yes
six months after how would you look back
at the first half of the year extremely
exciting from a personal point of view
and very disappointing because we had an
opportunity to reboot the eurozone not
just with the eurozone to move away from
the complacency and the constant denial
that was a massive and the reason
massive architectural fault line going
through the eurozone which is
threatening massively the whole of the
European Union process we had an
opportunity on the basis of the Greek
program which by the way was the first
program to manifest that denial to put
it right and unfortunately the powers
that be in the euro zone in the Euro
group chose to maintain denial but you
know what happens this is the experience
of the Soviet Union when you try to to
keep alive an economic system that
architectural II cannot survive through
political will and through Thorat
Arianism you may succeed in prolonging
it but when change happens it happens
very abruptly and catastrophically what
kind of change are you for saying well
there's no doubt that if we don't change
the architecture of the eurozone the
eurozone has no future do you do any
mistake when you were finance minister
every day
for example anybody who looks back
no but seriously yeah if there is any
Minister of Finance or of anything else
for that matter who tells you after six
months in a job especially in such a
stressful situation that they have made
no mistake they're dangerous people of
course I made mistakes
the greatest mistake was to sign the
application for the extension of a loan
agreement in the end of February I was
imagining that there was a genuine
interest on the side of the creditors to
find common ground and there wasn't they
were simply interested in crashing our
government just because they did not
want to have to deal with the
architectural fault lines that were
running through the eurozone and because
they didn't want to admit that for five
years they were implementing a
catastrophic program in Greece we lost
one third of our nominal GDP this is
worse than the Great Depression and no
one has come clean from the troika of
lenders that have been imposing this
policy to say this was a colossal
mistake despite all this and despite the
aggressiveness of the discussion though
you seem to be remaining quite
pro-european absolutely look my
criticism of the European Union and the
eurozone comes from a person who lives
and breathes Europe my greatest fear is
that the eurozone will not survive
because if it doesn't the centrifugal
forces that would be unleashed will be
demonic and they will destroy the
European Union and that will be
catastrophic not just for Europe but for
the whole global economy we are probably
the largest economy in the world and if
we allow ourselves to fall into a rot of
a post more than 1930s which is which
seems to me to be what we are doing then
that will be detrimental to the future
of Europeans and non Europeans alike we
definitely hope you're wrong on that
point
Yanni's thank you for coming to Ted
thank you
you